@item info breakpoints 	
@itemx info breakpoints @var{num}	
List breakpoints.  An argument specifies a specific breakpoint to list.

@item quit 		
Exit nitfol.

@item show language 	
Show the current source language.

@item condition @var{num} @var{exp}	
Set a condition for an existing breakpoint.

@item restore 	
Restore a saved game.

@item break @var{linespec}	
@itemx break @var{linespec} if @var{exp} 
Set a breakpoint.  An @code{if} clause specifies a condition.

@item stepi 		
@itemx stepi @var{num}		
Step exactly one instruction.  An argument specifies a repeat count.

@item restart 	
Restart the game.

@item object-tree 	
@itemx object-tree @var{exp}	
Display the object tree.  An argument says which object to use as the root of the tree.

@item disable display @var{num}	
Temporarily disable an automatic display.

@item select-frame @var{num}	
Select a specific stack frame.

@item alias @var{name} @var{value} 
Add an alias

@item down-silently 	
@itemx down-silently @var{num}	
Silently select the child of the selected frame.  An argument specifies how many frames down to go.

@item frame 		
@itemx frame @var{num}		
Show the selected stack frame.  An argument specifies a stack frame to show.

@item give @var{exp} @var{num}	
@itemx give @var{exp} ~ @var{num} 
Give an object an attribute.  With a tilde clears the attribute instead of setting it.

@item set @var{exp}		
Evaluate an expression without printing its value.

@item print @var{exp}	
Evaluates an expression and prints the result.  This can include function calls.

@item up 	
@itemx up @var{num}		
Select the parent of the selected frame.  An argument specifies how many frames up to go.

@item #  comment 	
Enter a comment

@item continue 		
@itemx continue @var{num}		
Continue execution.  An argument sets the ignore count of the current breakpoint.

@item dumpmem @var{file}	
Dump memory to a file

@item undo 		
Undo last move (not last debugger command).

@item display @var{exp}	
Print value of an expression each time the program stops.

@item move @var{exp} to @var{exp} 
Move an object around the object tree.

@item up-silently 	
@itemx up-silently @var{num}	
Select the parent of the selected frame silently.  An argument specifies how many frames up to go.

@item show copying 	
Show licensing information.

@item recording off 	
Stop recording a script.

@item jump @var{linespec}		
Continue execution at a new location.

@item recording on 	
Start recording a script.

@item ralias @var{name} @var{value} 
Add a recursive alias

@item globals 	
@itemx globals @var{exp}	
List all global variables and their values.  With an argument, list all only those with a specific value.

@item backtrace 	
@itemx backtrace @var{num}		
@itemx backtrace - @var{num}	
Display the parent functions of the current frame.  An argument specifies how many frames back to show.  If the argument is negative, start from the first frame instead of the current.

@item find 
Find objects whose shortnames contain a string.

@item finish 	
An argument specifies a repeat count.

@item down 	
@itemx down @var{num}	
Select the child of the selected frame.  An argument specifies how many frames down to go.

@item ignore @var{num} @var{num}        
Set the ignore count for a breakpoint.

@item replay off 	
Halt replay.

@item nexti 		
@itemx nexti @var{num}		
Step one instruction, stepping over subroutine calls.  Step a specified number of instructions, stepping over subroutine calls.

@item help 		
Print list of commands.

@item redo 		
Redo undid move.  Only works immediately after an @code{undo}.

@item enable @var{num}	
Re-enabled a breakpoint.

@item until 		
Resume execution until the program reaches a line number greater than the current line.

@item replay 	
Replay a recorded script.

@item unalias @var{name}
Remove an alias

@item remove @var{exp}	
Remove an object from the object tree.

@item info sources 	
List source files.

@item delete @var{num}		
Delete a breakpoint.

@item symbol-file @var{file}	
Load debugging info from a file (usually @file{gameinfo.dbg}).

@item automap @var{exp}	
Start automapping

@item show warranty 	
Show warranty information.

@item disable @var{num}	
Temporarily disable a breakpoint.

@item undisplay @var{num}		
Stop automatically displaying an expression.

@item enable display @var{num}	
Re-enable an automatic display.

@item step 		
@itemx step @var{num}		
Step through program to a different source line.  An argument specifies a repeat count.

@item info source 	
Get information on the current source file.

@item next 		
@itemx next @var{num}		
Step through program, stepping over subroutine calls.  An argument specifies a repeat count.

