#summary Summary of new features, updates, and fixes in Gargoyle releases.
#labels Featured,Phase-Implementation

==Changes in release 08-25-09==

===Gargoyle===

*New*
    * Added color support for Frotz / Z-Machine.
    * Added copy / paste support to and from the text buffer.
    * Added Glk hyperlinks support.
    * Delete key now removes input characters to the right of the cursor.
    * Enabled extended character input under Gtk / Linux.
    * Transcripts now created as UTF-8 text files.

*Fixes*
    * Event handling now properly queues events for later dispatch.
    * Colors in games with multiple text buffers are now handled properly.
    * Gargoyle settings file can now be saved under ~/.config directory.

<p><br/></p>
===Interpreters===

*Updates*
    * Git updated to 1.2.4.
    * Glulxe updated to 0.4.4.
    * JACL updated to 2.5.2.
    * TADS updated to 2.5.13 / 3.0.18.1.

*Fixes*
    * Alan function names no longer clash with the standard C library.
    * Alan interpreters no longer crash when invoked with a different name.
    * Alan stack code updated to handle 64-bit memory pointers.
    * Frotz will now return all characters requested by read operations.
    * Frotz no longer crashes on unusually long status lines.
    * Frotz now resets the status line height properly in certain games.
    * Hugo no longer crashes when launched without arguments.
    * Level 9 builds properly under GCC 4.3.3 and later.

<p><br/></p>
----

==Changes in release 12-25-08==

===Gargoyle===

*New*
  * Added Unicode support to conform with Glk 0.7.  Enables indexed text for Glulx-based story files.
  * Added support for reverse style hints.  Adjusted default ini settings to compensate.
  * Implemented buffered playback for Ogg / MP3 audio.
  * Added settings for default Glulx / Z Machine interpreters to ini.

*Fixes*
  * Wide input lines no longer corrupt right margin.
  * Automatically appends .sav for save files and .txt for transcript files on Windows.
  * Discards duplicate line inputs from command history.
  * No longer truncates certain whitespace used for formatting.
  * Resolved crash when playing audio files.
  * Resolved crash when loading jpeg files under Windows Vista.
  * Resolved crash when destroying save/restore dialog under Linux.

<p><br/></p>
===Interpreters===

*New*
  * Geas 0.4 added for Quest stories.
  * JACL 2.3.14 added for JACL stories.
  * Nitfol 0.5 included.

*Updates*
  * Alan 3 updated to 3.0 alpha 6.
  * Git updated to 1.2.1.
  * Glulxe updated to 0.4.3.
  * Hugo updated to 3.1.03.
  * Level 9 updated to 4.1.
  * Magnetic Scrolls updated to 2.3.
  * Scare updated to 1.3.10.
  * TADS updated to 2.5.12 / 3.0.16.

*Fixes*
  * Agility builds properly under Linux.
  * Agility closes when the Glk window is closed.
  * Frotz updates window height after Glk window is resized.
  * Frotz converts CR to newline before printing via Glk.
  * Merged patches from Simon Baldwin's IFP project.
  * Various 64-bit compatibility fixes applied.